Julie Héneault   12:48
Thank you so much for joining us today. I'm very-very glad to start this series of lectures with you two. So I've introduced the assignment already and the project to the students, it's a question revolving around the term neutrality in the field of graphic design, which I believe is a term that can be put in perspective, questioned, or criticized.


Julie Héneault   13:32
I'm gonna read a biography of you and your practice and what I propose is that either we exchange on a question-answer mode or you present and then we ask questions.

Johanna Ehde   13:41
Yes.

Julie Héneault   13:51
Which mode do you prefer?

Johanna Ehde   13:51
Yeah, we were going to ask you the same. We're really interested to have a discussion with you but also we could give you a kind of quick and dense presentation of our work. It's either or, I mean, you know, we can go straight in questions also. 


ER: We think, like we have a presentation that we can give that is between 20 minutes to half an hour, something like that.

JE: Maybe it's shorter. Yeah, 20, I think.


ER:  Yeah.

Julie Héneault   14:24
Sounds perfect! Then I will read your bio and then maybe start with the first question, which will then I'm sure evolve into your presentation, right?

Johanna Ehde   14:35
Yeah. Perfect.

Julie Héneault   14:37
So correct me if I'm wrong with the bio, I copied it from somewhere. You let me know if there are some updates in between. So, graphic designers Elizabeth Rafstedt and Johanna Ehde form Rietlanden Women's Office. Their practice is interested in current and historical issues connected to reproductive work and collaborative graphic design. The basis of their work is a printed publication series called MsHeresies that we have here that the students looked at already. Inquiry into collaborative graphic design practices and the ornament as a form of work critique and the ornament sits at the center of their practice, where they consider ornaments not simply as added decoration but as traces of the specific conditions under which a work was made. They look at the traces of reproductive work, such as lines of alteration and correction, flashing elements, improvise type, manifestations of urgency, become the ornaments which makes social relations legible. The search for ornaments, disruptive, diffuse and aesthetic qualities, and sketch the ornament as a point where aesthetics and politics intertwine.

I hope that was up to date.

Johanna Ehde   16:16
For sure.


ER: Yeah.

Julie Héneault   16:17
Maybe we can start this presentation by you presenting yourselves, maybe, and now we had a bit of a glimpse into your practice, but what we're curious to hear is well, firstly who you are, how your collaboration works and maybe you can start talking about MsHeresies.

Johanna Ehde   16:42
Yeah, thank you!

Julie Héneault   16:44
Great, now I'll turn this [camera] around.

Johanna Ehde   16:44
Also, I am Johanna, and this is Elizabeth. We're really happy to see that you're in a space together and not just on your own laptop. It’s very nice 

ER: Yeah, and it's so nice also when you have this online lecture that you actually see someone and at the same time, so that's super nice.

JE: Can we show you a slide show actually?

Julie Héneault   17:19
Yeah, of course.

Johanna Ehde   17:20
Okay, share.

ER: We are in our studio now in Amsterdam and here is a picture also from our studio a couple of weeks ago.

JE: Do you see the slideshow now? 

Julie Héneault   17:43
Yes, we do.

ER: Great. We thought of this- By the way, do you see us as well at the same time or?

Julie Héneault   17:55
Yeah.
We can see both.

ER: Okay, so we thought of this, when you came with this topic of the neutral and the connection to neutrality and graphic design. We also wanted to start here in our studio because it was sharing space together that made us form a group after our studies.

JE I mean, I think we were very intrigued by this. The word neutral is very key right now to us also like, what is happening with our work at the moment.

ER: Basically, maybe this introduction to our work, we can start with the work and then we can speak a little bit more about why we have chosen to have a collective practice. But what you can see on the screen now is a poster that was supposed to be shown in Leipzig at the modern Museum of Art there at this very moment, in connection to the book, the Buchmesse, the book fair in Leipzig that they have there yearly. And it is a republishing of a Palestinian poet and her name is Hila Abunnada and she was murdered, she was killed during the bombings of her home in Gaza. The text comes from a publishing platform that you should really look up—GazaPassages.org—and it's a publishing project called Passages Through Genocide. And they asked for everyone to republish and distribute the work from these Palestinian poets. On this poster it reads from the 8th of October last year. It reads, and this is Hila Abunnada, the writer, she wrote "Our news feeds of funeral homes, memorial services, obituary pages, we move from page to page as if walking through a square full of funerals packed side-by-side. God, the weight of these days." And this poster is not shown in Leipzig now because it is not neutral. 


JE: Yeah, that word is the specific motivation for it being censored in this exhibition. But we thought to move on to quickly speak about our practice and our work with MsHeresies. It's gonna be a bit of a dense ride, so please bear with us.

ER: But maybe we can also say that we both studied at the Gerrit Rietveld Academy in Amsterdam. I'm sure you know about it. And when we finished our studies, together with some friends also who work together with Julie in Paris. We had this like shared ongoing discussion at the Academy about feminism and feminism's role in graphic design. And when we all finished our studies, we just became this perfect like entities of workers under the neoliberal society, which we disagreed with. And we sat there with our laptops and instead of still being friends we also became competitors with one another, which was a very lonely and sad kind of reality to be put in. So that's why we started Rietlanden Women's Office and Rietlanden comes from an area not far away from here where our first studio was. So that is a little bit the background of why we started working together.

JE: OK, we'll dive into it. 


So here on the left you see a poster by the London based South Asian feminist collective Mukti. They were active between 1983 and 1987. And Mukti, their publication, they had 6 languages in which they translated the publication into, and they are all represented on this poster. And then the ornament, that detail on the poster to the right, it's actually a fold of a poster that we made made for an Amsterdam initiative called Palace of Typographic Masonry and the ornaments come from the publication Triple Jeopardy that was made in New York by the Third World Women's Alliance between 1971 and 1975. And both of these publications have been part of our research in the publication series MsHeresies.

So together, we make the publication series, MsHeresies, and our research often emerges from feminist publications of the so-called print activist movement of the 1960s to the late 80s, and concerns an overlap of collaborative graphic design and feminist graphic design history. By conducting research in both theory and practice, we experiment with and look at the typography, ornamentation and printmaking of collaboratively designed printed matter made within these movements. We're interested in furthering the field of graphic design by elaborating on graphic design's messy history, and its link to feminist print activist movements. And with this expression, messy history, we refer to the essay toward an expanded view of women in graphic design, Messy History versus Neat History by Martha Scotford. And it's from 1994.

The feminist intersectional issue of what is and isn't represented in graphic design's history is important to our work, and we ask what graphic design has been and could potentially be by questioning dominant ways of thinking, seeing, making and organizing.

ER: And when working on with MsHeresies, we engage them with selected archival material and do a practical research, we call it. And that is research by designing.
So our visual and theoretical interests include overlaps of subjects such as history, writing and representation, feminism and work critique and self-publishing and graphic design. And by seeking out and amplifying existing knowledge through conversations and interviews with other makers and researchers within these subjects, as well as actually writing together, we developed methods to do this.

We can start by, so these are all spreads from the MsHeresies' series.

Julie Héneault   26:29
Just so you know, I've just distributed, I think, all the issues of MsHeresies.

Johanna Ehde   26:33
Oh wow, first issue. (?)

Johanna Ehde   26:39
Wow.
UM, I'll read the quote from the Iowa City Women's press, who also published in "Ain't I a woman" and it's from all women are welcome to read their poetry from 1973.

Umm, but yeah, they write, and typical to society is the attitude that all labor done by women is crude. Many women will run minimum machines, sometimes in their lives, for their bosses, or even for political lovers. Hardly any women will be allowed near a more sophisticated press. We want to break that cycle by acquiring our own press but first, we wanted to break it by respecting people's labor within the limitation of the only machine allowed to us. We’re writing about these realizations to encourage other women to see the tools available to them as what they are.
A mimio is a small press, regardless of its degree of sophistication.
So this is 1973 and, of course, this is when people took over the means of production to make this publication.



ER: This messy history as a concept, the theorist and design researcher Martha Scotford she described the work on messy history as seeking to discover, study, and include a variety of the alternative approaches and activities that are often part of Women designers’ professional lives. We are very interested in this concept of messy history, and we’re taking this further to being especially interested in the designs made by those who perhaps didn't call themselves designers. yet produced beautiful objects of graphic design. This is often the case with these collectives of the print activist movement.
So print activism boomed between the 1960s and 90s in Europe and the US, and socially engaged collectives and organizations who wanted to increase awareness about their costs got together, made publications, and developed their own methods for spreading the words through printed matter. These methods in turn spurred writing and an array of manifestos and consciousness raising texts and their critical perspective on technologies, impact on social issues and visual communication, left visible traces in their graphic design.
And the publications also became formative for the political movements at the time, and they visually embody an overlap between reader, writer, editor, designer and printer. We were very interested in that aspect of it. Also in terms of the ornaments. So the print activist movement critically questioned who had the means, access and knowledge to print and in turn, the power to distribute and produce knowledge. And this same question in relation to the definition of messy history is fundamental to our practice.

Then we will speak a bit about the ornament and specifically the broken ornament. 


Johanna
So you see here the cover of Mukti Magazine from 1987, the issue on housing  And then a spread from Ms Heresies 5, where we published text by Lola Olufemi called, We're going to lose. Which is then paired with the visual essay from the Mukti Archive. So as an extension of the research we already conducted within our practice as the feminist graphic design collective, a practice situated between typography, print and image making and self publishing, we focus on ornamentation, where we consider ornaments as traces of work made under certain conditions.
        We're interested in the blurry and these small aspects of ornamentation. A messy and mostly unmapped legacy of unauthored graphic design made collaboratively and urgently. Evoking rage, curing maladies, expressing lust, or mocking those in power. We see the ornament as closely linked to graphic designs' role in the distributional knowledge and as a point where aesthetics and politics intertwine. 
The ornament in our idea of it isn't only an add-on value, but also a trace of reproductive work, or in a utopian sense, a trace of unalienated labor. The ornaments we collect in the archives are often traces of reproductive work, where their brokenness signifies their way of becoming ornaments, not made as only decorative, but often showing the pressing issues and conditions of the moment under which they were made.
And by the broken ornament, we also mean lines of alterations and corrections, clashing elements, improvised type, and manifestations of urgency. 
They are ornaments that make social relations legible and together with our ideas of the ornament and historical material, we discuss and question the digital interfaces and platforms of our current time with the curiosity, joy, and from a feminist perspective of work critique.

Elisabeth
Being a graphic design collective, our motivation lies in finding ways of designing collaboratively and to critically engage with this topic of collaborative graphic design.
And for us, this has to do with the lustful in making and in building a lifelong practice. It also has to do with an optimism about what graphic design can do and look like when considered a socially engaged practice. It then becomes necessary to build on and learn from a richer, more expensive graphic design history and to allow more space for underrepresented design practices, current as well as historic ones. This is not an altruistic mission, but a deep desire as feminist designers, it motivates us deeply. We are driven by a truly collaborative spirit and conviction that our practice of graphic design allows us to deeply engage with subjects. We tried to go into conversation with the material we give form to. And as we seek out the makers of feminist publications and ask them how they work together, we learn about the difference and similarities between different generations of makers. When it comes to working conditions, design methods and political struggles. 
An important part of our work includes interviews and conversations. We prepare, conduct, transcribe, and edit these interviews and conversations as part of the Ms Heresies series too. Here is the spread of an example of that. It's with the editors of triple jeopardy in the third issue of Ms Heresies.


Johanna
So we photograph and document overviews and details of the material and by scanning we capture, select the details of ornaments, typography and paper structures as well as images, layouts and text. The selected archival material is then clearly marked with sources and dates. Through our engagement with these documents of collaboration, their relationships and their ideas about form come to illuminate our ways of working.So this archival research lays the foundation of our practical research.

So each element in our archival collection is thoroughly captioned, and no matter what treatment or distortion it has undergone  And this act of captioning has been something we have developed throughout our practice, and we play with ways of collaboratively writing and typesetting these captions and often make them quite lengthy, sometimes humoristic, but always with an  attempt for any reader to be able to trace back from where and in what context the specific details, detail, ornament, or part of the collection it originated. 
So an important method in our project is writing, and more specifically, writing together. By using online softwares we have a practice of sketching sentences and editing each other's writing already. We're taking this practice further by trying to write about graphic design together as well outside of Ms Heresies.


ER: I think it's quite nice to end somewhere here and maybe also just to say one last thing about the form that we work in, which is also the visual essay. That is that we're trying to find ways in which the visual essaying and to like use this image material and ornaments and part of the archive and weaving that through painting and clashing etcetera together with and writing and republishing of texts. 

Maybe we can have a discussion.

Julie Héneault   41:05
Maybe we can start asking you questions. Ohh.

Julie Héneault   42:57
I was wondering if you could maybe talk a bit more about your interest in William Morris and how it did or did not influence your work? 

Johanna Ehde   43:14
Johanna Yeah, I really appreciate that you bring us back to William Morris because well, it's been many years since we found this lecture and we published it in 2019: Useful work versus useless toil. And we were drawn to it, I mean we read it over and over, out loud to each other and we were also laughing and commenting on it. It's, of course extremely rhetorical.
And William Morris you know, you can say many things about him..

Johanna Ehde   43:52
Johanna But I think at that point we're very drawn to the text also because it's so utopia and it's so grand and it really talks about design in such a big context. You know the concept of the ornament, the life, and you know, he brings in work. Of course, it's a work critique in connection to this. I think we have changed it a lot in our definition of it, but that was such a crucial point for us.

Elisabeth but his work critique is coming from this emergence of industrialism, right?
So, he is seeing, you know this deeply, a corrosive labor where life is basically just obliterated under capitalism.And he is describing, like the ornament almost becomes like a seismograph, or a way of telling to what extent you're alienated from your work. So he's describing, on the one hand, this ornament that can only come through enough agency, enough rest, and of variation of work. And then he's describing this other ornament that is made under capitalism, which is basically a kind of a dead ornament. And we became very interested in that from the point of view of graphic design and like, what are our ornaments now? Because we read his work as he's putting up the framework as the ornament being this trace of your working condition actually or the condition of life.  And so when we look at these archives of collaboratively made graphic design, we tried to look for that. Like how how did this specific item come about, what kind of methods prompted, and this may be very small details in the material itself. Does that make sense?

Julie Héneault   46:50
I Guess.

Johanna Ehde   46:52
Johanna I mean graphic design history is of course also or like technology is interesting in relation to this, because in a way the graphic designer came about as a kind of managerial role.

Johanna Ehde   47:04
Johanna There's something inherently wrong with how we came about. Or like what happened to the division of Labor and like what happened, to the role of the typesetter, with this technological changes. 


Elisabeth There’s a really interesting text written by Jay Dakota Brown, called Typography, Automation and the Division of Labor. 
You should read this one.
Maybe you read it already? 

Julie Héneault   47:45
Yeah, definitely.
No, I didn't. Did anybody read it ?

Johanna Ehde   47:56
Elisabeth This person is describing the history of graphic design from the point of view of technology, but also capitalism and how it has changed. It's really interesting to think about.
For example, if we think about the very early graphic designer could maybe be described who copies manuscripts right? And that person could also inscribe themselves into the material and in which they copied, and we have this in the fourth Miss Harris is on the cover there.
You see this person, ….. she’s called? She's kind of like hanging here. You see her? And she drew herself into the manuscript and hanging like this, tail of a drop cap queue. So she's like that and transforming herself into typography into the graphic design that she is producing.

Johanna Ehde   49:16
Elisabeth And it's something very interesting with that, that it's not such a big gap between the sender and the receiver or all of these different dichotomies that we and that we kind of use when we learn about graphic design in school.  Or when we define graphic design, like these things are much more mashed. Also, like the sacred and profane is mashed here and and yeah, other other things.

Julie Héneault   49:56
Umm.

Johanna Ehde   49:58
Johanna And William Morris loved that.


Julie Héneault   50:03
With this example that you just showed, it feels like there is something, let's say called the mainstream and then there would be this kind of undercover hidden messages.  That you're in your work, I believe, kind of like putting back to the surface, kind of a secretive society that doesn't want to belong to the rest, or cannot belong maybe. 

Johanna Ehde   50:32
Elisabeth That's such a nice way of putting it.
I think that, the structures, I mean basically the power structures under which we live, they will decide what is considered neutral, right? But it's actually just what's considered aline with the power structures under which we live. So I think that, anything that moves against that, and maybe in this society we have now, is considered as an underground and an alternative but it's only in the measure against what is prevailing I guess.

Julie Héneault   51:23
There's also something.
Maybe we can discuss or I'd like to hear your thoughts.
And then because now we're talking about this practice of graphic design that becomes like a struggle, a political fight. Isn't there a site of it also that's also coming back to William Morris and your activity of publishing, isn't there? The notion of pleasure that's there for the viewer and the maker.

Johanna Ehde   51:53
Completely. That's such an important point you make and, I think particularly our work or our position is I think often misread as a struggle or like that we're trying to do good by, let's say, our political convictions through our work. For the sake of doing it, and that's really a lie, because we're very indulging in something that we love. And actually, even though our position is feminist, I think that's the kind of methods we have. Or, you know what motivates us to make? And it's quite the uh, it's quite strange or like it's not.

Julie Héneault   52:43
No.

Johanna Ehde   52:44
It's not the it's.
It's exactly very much more like it's found in, in pleasure and lots, which we also think is like a radical move or radical, but ition.

Julie Héneault   52:55
Umm.

Johanna Ehde   52:57
But it is a radical position in that it's it's asking for real freedom, which we ask between us.
Right.
So we like a freedom of like and expression in the very little form of.
Like we allow each other to do things just to each other within a collective, and that is a method of having a close collective practice and it is.
I think that all.
I'll political struggles that are worth it's name.
We look for this true freedom for for ohh let's say or even the smallest of groups rather than looking at what is good and I'm not not like the freedom in the terms of the liberal and the neoliberal sense, of course.

Julie Héneault   53:51
Umm.

Johanna Ehde   53:57
And yeah, but yeah, it has to be pleasure.
Also, I think we also talk about the work as as a dedicated it's a what we do is also a dedication to other people's work and that's a very that is a that is a a joy and the types that are text that you can't wait for people to read.
You know, that's also pleasure.
I mean that is when graphic design is pleasurable.
It's this thing that you actually you can go into and dedicate yourself to a material and you are.
You are perhaps not the one you know as sitting an authoring that, but you are.
You are the type types that they're reader of that material.
And yeah, that that is very that's that is a very pleasurable thing.

Julie Héneault   54:55
I'd like to ask you a more, let's say concrete.
Maybe question about the funds you use.
I believe sometimes you you draw the fonts you're gonna use, but I have the feeling that I've, uh, I've seen that you use eaves in most of your Miss Harris's.

Johanna Ehde   55:18
Yeah.

Julie Héneault   55:18
Can you tell us a bit about how you make, how you pick a font?

Johanna Ehde   55:22
Yeah, I love this question.
It's so it's so key in what we do and it's almost sometimes like we try to pretend that it's not there or this moment of scrolling in the font list.
Umm, this is not acceptable with.
We just we I think we found a way to to not pick a phones but we just have a set of fonts that are, yeah, some of them we've made ourselves.
So we use them a lot.
Umm.
And then we have these, like, not even handful of amounts of funds that we kind of have lived with and gotten to know and worked with.
And yeah, Mrs Eaves is 1, but yeah, it's it's such a.
It's such an interesting we don't even like.
I mean, it's also this can also be true.
Like, it's not even really like the font that you use like or finding it awkward and a bit ugly, like for example with Mrs Eves and this phone has such long like ascenders and descenders and we like to type set it in quite like.
And tight lending and this is causing us all sorts of problems because the senders and descenders kiss, so we need to manually then separate them a little bit because we don't like them clashing and it becomes this like it kept quite tedious way of working with the font that really makes you start loving it like so a bad aspect of a fund can make you really get a relationship with it.

Julie Héneault   56:54
And.

Johanna Ehde   57:17
It's like when you learn how to fight with your friends, and then you get over it and you become better friends, you know, and you, your relationship actually evolves.
And I think that is how you should have it.
You shouldn't just abandon the fonts that you use to like go go to the next one and just put the other one on on the on the scrap heap.

Julie Héneault   57:35
Umm.
Umm.

Johanna Ehde   57:44
Yeah.

Julie Héneault   57:46
Such a beautiful metaphor.
I love it.
And how do you then maybe I ask you last question and probably the students will have some things to ask, but and it's a difficult one.
How do you position yourself towards?
The notion of readability and maybe accessibility and then I'm I go to another question like do you encounter friction sometimes when you present certain designs with this kind of counter arguments that would be it's not readable which I don't think so.

Johanna Ehde   58:09
Umm.
Yeah.

Julie Héneault   58:24
But I'm just like quoting some imaginary people.

Johanna Ehde   58:24
Yeah, yeah.
That's such a.
Also, I think great question and key question to all of our like our work and I guess the the idea of refusing an idea of product productivity and efficiency.
And.
I mean, perhaps also the idea of being neutral in your design.
I think when we do these things in our type setting that we very clearly disrupt a text or, you know, put a pair in.
There are some sticks.
Right in your eyes, where you're supposed to be reading.
It's also in a way of being very clear about our position.
And hopefully like it's it's really showing.

Julie Héneault   59:09
Umm.

Johanna Ehde   59:12
Like, here's the theater in you're the audience, and you're you're participating actively.
And you're reading this, uh, we we are quite critical towards this.
Like you say, imaginary person who will ask this question and like and that criticality comes from that you know we we've learned that we as graphic designers we should preempt the how the reader will receive the message that we sent so.

Julie Héneault   59:30
To.

Johanna Ehde   59:46
And we think that we're kind of smarter than the reader and we we think it's the complete opposite like it will always be read in a much more interesting way than we could ever have anticipated.
And it does not come from the message being read in an efficient way, or that the readability so smooth that the reader didn't even notice that they read it or something like that.
But we believe that it that that kind of friction is a is the reader can handle it.
The reader can handle a lot and then yeah, it's not.
It's not stupid, it's it's.
It's much more intelligent than we than we could ever think.
It's interesting also relation to grids like we've had this discussions about the very large ideas about what a what, a good grid can do, which is also do very in a very streamlined way.

Julie Héneault   1:00:44
Hmm.
Umm.
And.

Johanna Ehde   1:01:07
Yeah.
Yeah, we I think also like being being kind of.
And making graphic design that a bit goes against this kind of streamline of the interfaces in which we consume information.
I think it's very important when the platforms are becoming bigger and bigger and eating up smaller platforms, you know, non speaking about big take and thinking that big tech like that, that's a neutral space for me to consume my information and and yeah it's I think it's false idea that that that is a neutral space and and it should be challenged.

Julie Héneault   1:01:57
You.

Johanna Ehde   1:01:57
Uh, yeah, that's the figure visit.

Julie Héneault   1:02:05
So maybe I'm gonna ask the class if they have questions.
Yes, lots of I see.
Can you hear her?

Johanna Ehde   1:02:16
No.

Julie Héneault   1:02:18
Thanks.

Johanna Ehde   1:02:19
We can't hear you.


Question from Mita  1:02:30
I have a question, because since you're referring to the print activist movement, I was wondering what are your ideas about the distribution of your works were and because the movement also evolved around reaching as many people as possible so the distribution should be made as accessible as possible, so I was wondering what your views on distributing of your works work were?

Johanna Ehde   1:02:58
Umm, it wasn't nice. Also a nice question! I feel like distribution is one of these topics within graphic design that makes graphic design like that's at least why I'm drawn to graphic design like it's not this distribution or like the distribution capacity that it has, let's say.

When you said that they're trying to reach as many as possible, it immediately made me think of how these movements use publications as a way to actually create community.
So that could also be quite fairly local communities, I think and depending on which publication or group. But yeah, how do we see it? Like you mean distribution of MsHeresies our publication, yeah?

Mita  1:04:01
Yeah.

Johanna Ehde   1:04:03
I think this goes also together with the production, right? Yeah, because we could admit a digital publication, for example, that could be distributed really fast and wide and it's not right, it's also a print work actually and the printing is made by a local printer here who still has their old offset press in the very space that they squatted in the 80s. 
So it's like the publication is made very close to us and we are always part of this process and to create this iris printing that we use and which is basically using one offset printing plates with several inks on it. Our printer needs to break their machine a little bit and to make it and like this this way of production is like energy in our work. 
It's like a motor and a motivation, and for us to do it like if we made it a digital publication, we probably wouldn't have made a publication at all. So that is also maybe where this aspect of lust comes in and like what kind of medium we are interested in working in and sometimes that is not a logical decision, it comes from a myriad of other aspects.

Elisabeth Rafstedt
Yeah, exactly. And I think how it started when we made MsHeresies and I think that's still probably true, it really has no interest in the way we make it, iit almost has no interest in reaching an audience or so. I mean we're very happy that it does, but we started making it as a way to figure out how we could design together and then realizing we found that extremely pleasurable and interesting. So yeah, we don't have a message that we're trying to get out.
I mean, that's not what we're, or at least not as broadly as possible, because I think you're right that then it would be also undone. Hmm, because it's a print work.


Johanna Ehde Are you doubting it?


Elisabeth Rafstedt
No, but I think that the question is so interesting because I think of all that, because of course you want to, you know, spread your work etc. But it’s not made with that intention to be informative or educational or propagandistic or anything like that. 


Johanna Ehde 
Uh, but it's yeah, we, I mean, we do speak of it though in relation to I think a bigger perspective also of time which is I think it also prints it’s key in that. So these, yeah, these print works.
When we do decide on an edition like how many prints we're going to make.
We sometimes also talk about like 100 years from now, like it's the distribution of the work.
Also, over time, I guess. If that makes sense.

Johanna Ehde   1:08:22
And the sound may be pompous, but I guess. It's very exciting to imagine your work flying around in ways that you have no control over.

Elisabeth Rafstedt
Also, I think also to acknowledge the limit the limitations of the work that you specifically do that that, that has a very, very small niche of and of community, of publics and then other people are great at doing like other kinds of work be painting or be it, I don't know, writing tweets or writing articles or poetry or making films, I don't know.
But our work materializes in print, yeah.

Johanna Ehde
We also have a distributor.

Julie Héneault   1:09:32
Any questions?
Maybe, it just popped in my head, like how did you think of the price of your publications?
And did you think of making them available for free or?

Johanna Ehde   1:09:49
Yeah. Um, it's a very difficult question, the price. It's almost impossible.
It's maybe seen as expensive, potentially could be seen as cheap as well.
It's such an interesting one. 


Johanna Ehde
So I made a publication with my thesis actually that I printed offset and I was like it's gonna be distributed for free. But what I noticed in this world, if you do it for free, it's either that people don't really want it or they treat it like a flyer to be thrown away or something. So yeah, it has so many dimensions. This thing is like putting a price tag on your work and on your labor and on the things that you make and stuff like that.

Julie Héneault   1:11:09
Umm.

Johanna Ehde   1:11:15
Umm yeah.
It's maybe the price is a good hindrance for people to try to acquire the work.

Julie Héneault   1:11:25
What?

Johanna Ehde   1:11:27
No, but yeah, it's it's a very difficult to get it right, I think.


Julie Héneault   1:11:36
It would be the subject of an entire lecture, I'm sure the price of things, the price of your work, the price of the printers work, the price of the typographys you buy, yeah.

Johanna Ehde   1:11:40
Yeah.
Exactly.

Julie Héneault   1:11:50
Are you OK with the last question?

Johanna Ehde   1:11:58
sure!

Hana Kiani  1:12:00
Good.
So I was wondering about what your process looks like in curating the content for like one of the issues because you have all this like different archival material. Do you start from one text or one theme? And also these ornaments that you use, they're also part of the archive for sure, but they also used as ornaments and is there always like a the connection between other contacts and nonsense that you use that for one issue?

Johanna Ehde   1:12:42
Ah, I' I love that you're looking upwards.
It looks like you're thinking, but you're looking at us.

Julie Héneault & Hana   1:12:46
Yes, hahaha

Johanna Ehde   1:12:47

What a nice question.
We have these backsides of our publication that reflect it a bit, like the readings that we do and what we're busy with discussing.
And so I think, yeah, through these readings and and findings it usually happens that we end up in in an archive.
Like when we found triple jeopardy that we published in the third issue, it was through reading Angela Davis. Freedom is a constant struggle where she brings up triple jeopardy as this key publication for, like intersectional feminism, because one of the Founders wrote this essay  about being feminist and black or being a black woman.
For many of these publications, we're lucky to have an archive called the ‘Archive of Social History’ and they hold many of the publications.
So then we go there and we look at them and photograph, scan,... But then of course, we draw into the materials so we sample it.
We use it in different ways.
We also have, I mean for the next issue that we're working on now, it's also a lot of material that we found through other friends and collaborators here.
So the text is via a poetry publisher close to us, and who knows this author and the visual archive that we're going into is thanks to this curator and artist here.
It's like an Italian feminist art collective that we were visiting and she has worked with them for many, many years researching.
So it kinda happens naturally through our relationships as well.
Yeah.

And I think that it's very important to acknowledge how much work lies behind each issue by people who we barely know.
So we realised all authorship is co-authorship.
I think we also, when we choose the material we work with, it's also very much in relation to the previous issues. So we see it a bit as one work also.
we felt like publishing a piece of humorous prose, but still it’ll always be linked to this broad topic of work, critique or collaboration.
But they really  exist in relation to each other as well, and we also republish between them like reusing ornaments and references.

It's not that we have like a short list of like ohh we choose between these 10 archives and these ten texts or something like that.
But it's very much like things come to us and you grab it because something about it catches you, you become extremely curious.
And then as with everything, you start pulling the threads and it just unfolds a lot,of more interesting things.


We don't sit and like, have brainstorm sessions. It's more about taking what immediately draws our attention.
I think that also really reflects how we design.
We also never sit down and try to come up with an idea or something like we don't have this design thinking strategy. We just have our methods and we just keep making and experiment with where it could lead us.
So even though it's commissioned, we don't try to make a graphic design kind of strategy or concept to solve something.


Julie Héneault   1:18:39
Thank you 
And I think it's past noon already.
We could, I think, keep on talking for three more hours. *laughs*
But do you want to say something as a conclusion?


Johanna Ehde   1:19:12
Before we hang up, but I would also like to say thank you to you for inviting us and for coming up with these questions.
It's been really inspiring and tomorrow we're gonna have a little lecture and we were so inspired by your questions. We started to write a whole document with questions.*laughs*
We're giving a lecture in Antwerp tomorrow at the Royal Art School.

Yeah, but the next Miss Harris is that we're working on and we would like to invite you all to join us in launching it, whenever that will be at some point this spring.
It will be about a very interesting feminist collective from Naples and the text will be from a writer from Philadelphia and it's a chapter from her coming novel, It's called “manager”. It's very funny.





















You would like to say something more about this thing with a position and being neutral.
And does that really think that it's very important to?

Yeah, to have a position and take a position and that position will always be changing and it doesn't mean that you're cemented yourself into a certain set of ideas?
Umm, but it is important to yeah, take a position.
Yeah.
Or try a position, I think right.
I mean try out the position, I think especially when we see it in our students also it can be very scary to take a position or try out the position but yeah there isn't really a neutral.
Umm design is there?
No, you can't do that.
If that becomes a hope to be able to always remain neutral, it will be a very meager kind of basis to stand on.
Yeah.

Julie Héneault   1:22:11
Thank you for this conclusion and I will forward the newsletter with the new Miss Harris's to everyone in the class and and we stay in touch.

Johanna Ehde   1:22:27
Yeah, yeah.

Julie Héneault   1:22:30
And maybe I will also forward the link to the lecture you will be giving tomorrow to continue this conversation.

Johanna Ehde   1:22:30
Get.
Yeah.
Exactly.
Yeah, yeah.


Julie Héneault   1:22:40
Right.

Johanna Ehde   1:22:41
Antwerp tomorrow at 6:00 in the evening.

Julie Héneault   1:22:44
OK, outage.
And lastly.
The students will be test with making publications in a free form for this assignment, so I will make sure you get it.

Johanna Ehde   1:22:58
Hmm.

Julie Héneault   1:23:04
Get a of view of what has been produced.

Johanna Ehde   1:23:09
Yeah.

Julie Héneault   1:23:09
And and and again it was.
I really necessary for me to present you and your work to the students as part of this project, so thank you.
Thank you so much.

Johanna Ehde   1:23:22
Thank you.
We look forward to seeing what you make.
Yeah.
Good luck with it.
Have fun and.

Julie Héneault   1:23:28
It's.
Bye bye.

Johanna Ehde   1:23:31
Bye bye.

Julie Héneault stopped transcription